One, two, three, four. One, two, three, four. One,
two, three.
Testing, testing. One, two, three, four. One,
two, three. One, two, three, four. One, two,
three. This is Tuesday, September the 5th. In the
Blocker Building, I have the honor and pleasure of
chatting with Dr. Janet McCann, Professor of
English, about her years here at Texas A&M. And to
introduce yourself to someone who might read this
transcription or hear the tape many years in the
future, describe, if you will, your background.
Where did you grow up? What did parents do? Where
did you go to high school and then college?
Experience before coming to A&M. Okay. I grew up in
Newark, Delaware. My mother was a language
teacher and my father was a chemist. I went to the
University of Delaware at first, and then I got
thrown out. I was thrown out of the University of
Delaware for producing an illegal newspaper.
After that, I went to Otterbein College, and I
graduated from there in 1963.
And then I went on to the University of Pittsburgh
for my graduate degree. I got the master's degree
in 1964, and then I was married in 65. I had, though,
by that time, completed my... coursework. And so I
finished up my doctoral degree at the University
of Pittsburgh to receive it in 1974, ten years
later. But I came out here in 1968. How did you and
A&M become connected? My husband took a job here in
1968, and that's when the job market slammed shut.
Before that, there were lots of jobs. And, in fact,
with my master's degree, in 64, I was offered a
whole bunch of jobs. But then all of a sudden,
everything closed down. And Hugh looked for a job
all over, and finally found a job at Texas A&M. So he
came out here to start teaching in the fall of 1964.
At that time, we had one daughter, Stephanie, and I
was pregnant with the second child. Did you begin
teaching that year? Yes, I did, but not at first. I
came out in the fall. Lee Martin was then chair of
the English department. And there was a professor
who apparently had been behaving reprehensibly,
and this person was booted out without ceremony.
And then Lee Martin hired me to take his place in the
middle of the second semester in 1969. In the
spring of 1969, mid-semester, I was hired. So I
took over class. I took over two classes, one
Shakespeare class and two argumentation
classes, and I was hired as an instructor then.
This is the only time I will ask you about salary.
What was the beginning salary in 1969? The
beginning salary was $8,000 a year. However, we
didn't get raises, and I got that $8,000 a year for
many years after that. So there really wasn't a
search process or a search committee or anything?
No, there certainly wasn't. In fact, I was hired. I
was hired. I was hired. I had sent in when I came out
here and looked around. Actually, I kind of
suffered from culture shock because we'd just
come from the University of Chicago, and this
place was very different from the rest of the world
then. For one thing, in the rest of the world, not
everybody had pickups with gun racks in them. This
was something that struck my eye when I got off the
bus because I came out on a bus. For another, they
then had in the Eagle, which was then the Bryan
Eagle, they had a weekend, every weekend they had a
violent death toll, which included stabbings and
shootings and drownings as well as car crashes. So
I came here, and I thought I was on Mars. I didn't
like the activities for women because we were kind
of supposed to be faculty wives, and this is not
what I thought I'd trained for. And so I was bored,
and I sent a resume with my newly minted master's on
it to the head of the English department. Of
course, I didn't get any response. And I was
complaining to Manuel Davenport at a rather
well-oiled party about how crummy things were and
how I wanted something to do, and he said, go in and
introduce yourself to the department chair. And
so I did this. I was very uneasy about this kind of
thing, but I went in, I said, hello, I'm Janet
McCann, I'd like a job. He said, well, I'll see what
I can do for you next year. And this was... This was
in the beginning of the spring, and who was the
department chair? Lee Martin. This was Lee, your
company. Oh, and he said, see what he could do for me
in the fall. He said he might have a class or two that
nobody wanted. Well, about a month later, he
called me up and said, can you start teaching
Monday? So that was my beginning. And this was to
replace the faculty member? Who had been given the
royal title, yes. Would it be appropriate on this
to discuss his alleged shortcomings?
Probably not. They were fairly spectacular.
Okay, so I was hired to fill in for someone who had
been fired, and I was not told any of the background
of the situation. And this was about what point in
the semester? This was in the middle of the
semester. So I had a bunch of students. I got a grade
book with a bunch of grades, and these students
seemed extremely disorderly and rude. And I had
not got the impression that Aggies were lying. I
didn't know anything like that, but due to
apparently the strained relationships with the
previous instructor, about which I was told
nothing, I had a bunch of loony students all
semester. They said and did strange things in
class. They'd showed up when they felt like it and
left when they felt like it. I was going to not teach
here anymore. I was going to look for something
somewhere else. but somebody confided in me that
the previous instructor had set up bad
relationships with the students and therefore I
should give it another chance and take another
semester if offered, so I did. And, of course, they
were completely different the second time. All
right, now those first classes you taught were
what level courses? I had a Shakespeare course,
which was an interesting upper-level
Shakespeare course. Well, it's not upper-level,
really. It's 212. Back then there were very few
courses, and this is one thing that makes it very
different from now. There was no real hierarchy
within the department. That is, everybody taught
the same thing. There was not a lot of fighting for
classes. There were very few graduate classes,
and the graduate program was new. The graduate
classes were taught by the same people every time,
so there was no fighting for those. And otherwise
everybody taught the same survey classes,
world-lit, American-lit, British-lit. There
was Shakespeare. I think there was Chaucer. I
didn't ever teach that. There were classes in
argumentation and freshman composition.
But we all took our turn teaching them, and I
believe it was the head's position that everybody
should have a class of freshman English a year, so
we all did. The department was located? The
department was in the academic building.
Describe it. Describe it physically, about how
many people and who were the key, who were the
senior folks. Okay, the senior, there was John
Paul Abbott and Carol Laverty. There was Harrison
Hurth. There were Sid Cox and, oh, gosh,
scheduling fellow. Curtis Shoddy, who's still
around.
Frank Pierce was there. And I'm trying to think of
others. There was somebody named John Gwynn.
There was E.E. Stokes. There was a woman, one woman
named Muriel Seville, and she was only there
briefly, and she was the only woman who was a
regular faculty member. So one full-time female.
One full-time female, if you don't count
students. There were a couple of students who were
teaching, a couple of women students who were
teaching full-time, but they were students. And
the normal workload then for a full-time faculty
member, in English, was how many sections per
semester? That's hard to answer because I always
had nine hours. But one of the classes was always
large, and they would count that as two classes. So
it was a theoretical 12-hour load, and some people
did have 12-hour loads. If you taught speech, for
instance, you always had a 12-hour load. But since
they would count a class of 100, which I frequently
had, as two classes, I always had a nine-hour load.
Now, the introductory survey courses had about
how many students, the freshman English courses?
Oh, the freshman English courses, they had, as
now, a limit of 25, but they were often smaller.
Often you'd have 17 or 18 students in there. Now, of
course, they're always jammed. As you were being
introduced into the department, describe how the
department received you. How did it work? How did
they accept you or not accept you? They didn't
quite know what to do with me. I was an instructor
with a master's degree. Ph.D.s were not required
for tenure-track work then, and in fact, some of
the people, Steve Jernigan was there, too, and
Steve and Sid and several others, Frank, for that
matter, did not have Ph.D.s. So that wasn't a
problem. I was the youngest person in the
department. That was kind of a problem. I kind of
fell between the graduate, in their minds, I kind
of fell between the graduate students and the
professors. The graduate students were a very
motley bunch then. I
was not, I think I was just kind of accepted
by the younger people in the faculty who were still
considerably older than I and overlooked
entirely by the older people. Some of them, Carol
Laverty, for instance, persisted in thinking I
was a graduate student. And the other people in the
building didn't consider me, that is, people
outside the English department. I was constantly
challenged on my right to use the elevator. People
would say, what department are you in? And
sometimes I got a little bit irritated with this.
And the graduate program was a master's degree
only at that point? No, it wasn't. It was a Ph.D.
program. But Ph.D. was already authorized. Yes,
and I think that they graduated the first one about
the year before. It was either the year I came or the
year I came. In terms of scholarship and
reputation, who were the people best known in the
department? Well, no one had published anything.
I mean, Frank Pierce wrote Mystery Stories. He was
one of the best published. Herth and two of the
others, I think Laverty and somebody else, had
written a textbook
that was used in the basic literature class, the
203. and Lee Martin had written a textbook called
the 500 word theme which Harry Kreuter then
revised and that was about it scholarship wasn't
the dumb thing did you find anyone that you could
turn to for advice in the department who became a
friend Stanley Archer describe him Stanley
Archer was always very reserved but extremely
helpful and I always in fact until he died I always
went to Stanley Archer when I had some kind of
naughty question example any of his advice his
counsel well
several times that I had felt that I had been not
treated right by the department or the University
and I went to Stanley Archer before doing anything
about it and Stanley Archer agreed that I had been
not treated right and he he looked over letters
that I wrote concerning this that went to various
people and made suggestions on the letters that
were very useful now in describe the the students
your first years here ok leaving aside the bunch of
loons I had the first semester they were for the
most part male in fact in my first class that these
are the ones I took over I had only two women in the
three classes for the next four or five years I had
by far I
would say oh maybe three to one at least men versus
women they were all for the most part they were all
white they were all the uniforms were by far
greater presence you looked out in the class and
you saw mostly uniforms
they were very they called me ma'am they were very
obedient again leaving out this first lot however
they had no intellectual many of them had no
intellectual curiosity and English was
something they had to get through on their way to
some to something else sometimes they would
develop I always liked teaching Shakespeare
although I have no training in it because they had a
tendency to bond with Shakespeare and actually
take an interest in in what they were doing but as
far as learning methods and materials of research
they were not into this the
activities with those first students can you
share any anecdotes of what it was like with their
excuses are there did any of them ever try to put one
over on you oh many times okay one I had it this was a
member of the Corps of Cadets and he was he was
missing for about two-thirds of the semester and
then he reappeared with this letter assigned Dr.
Anderson urologist with a complicated and
detailed description of what was supposedly
wrong with this young man's urinary system that
had caused him to miss my class and it was
supposedly signed by his father too and by the by
Dr. Anderson and I read the thing and it sounded a
little funny I didn't think the doctor would be
quite so free with details in fact it sounded a
little bit like it had been even taken from
somewhere so I didn't he was supposed to come
around Monday I was supposed to I went to a party on
Friday on Friday evening and there was Dr.
Anderson so I asked about this letter and he said
that this the student had been to his office for
some sort of minor problem at the beginning of the
semester but he had never written any letter for
him this guy pinched the the stationery and so I he
showed up on Monday and I said Mr. Smith that's a
pseudonym would you like to hear what Dr. Anderson
said about your letter and he said no ma'am I don't
think I would and I never saw him again my
favorite is youngster who told me the first day of
the semester that his grandfather was very ill I
expressed my concern my sadness I hope it's not
serious oh very serious oh gee gee he said in fact he
may not survive this semester I said well I'll work
with you and we'll do the best we can as he walked out
the door he turned over his shoulder and he said
it's in fact it's almost certain he's gonna die the
first day of deer season and he grinned as he walked
away what about classroom behavior patterns how
did Aggies behave in class in the in those early
years I don't think they did it politely for the
most part of that they they tended to calculate
what they needed to do to get through the course and
do that much and they were always polite back then
there was such a thing as a gentleman see that
many of them were quite content to receive I never
had any trouble with students in those first years
at all except for again leaving aside this first
lot Gciendo and large core percentage in those
years yes uh-huh in general were these country
boys or city there were country boys for the most
part and
very few liberal arts majors yes q liberal arts
majors and the those who were I tended not to get
because I tended to teach basic classes on the
other hand there weren't that many specialized
classes for instance I'm in creative writing and
that's what I do now I coordinate the creative
writing classes there was no creative writing
then after years and years Frank Pierce I think
started creative writing and Dick Costa taught
creative writing and there was one class a year and
you were lucky to get your 10 students that you
needed to have that class make now of course we have
we can't offer enough we especially our 200 level
courses we always get we're offering four
sections this time and I had dozens and dozens of
requests to be forced in but you can't it's it's 225
students to teach creative writing that's enough
students you can't do any more than that teach them
describe registration in that era those early
years as I recall there were long tables there were
there was a room somewhere maybe in Heaton I don't
remember where it was right now Sabisa and G
Raleigh or had we already moved out of that where
you where faculty used to go on registration day
the students went through there I don't remember
whether whether I just remember sitting at these
tables and having people come in I would be
representing like Shakespeare and people would
sign up I I , I
don't remember when that stopped and I don't
remember where it was but I certainly remember
doing it. Those in those early years did you have
the normal rules in your syllabus did you have any
guidelines that you gave to the students what you
expected. No some people did I mean I had a syllabus
if you mean assignments and so forth yes I had a
syllabus with the assignments on it and the
textbook that and usually it was one page and that
was it. Did you check roll in those years? Every
day, no, I didn't. Basically, though, after the
first two weeks at least, I knew who everybody was
in the smaller classes. In the bigger classes, I
always left it up to them if they wanted to come to
class, and I think this is one of the reasons that I
never had any trouble with students during that
time period because I didn't make them come to
class. If they missed a quiz, they could not make it
up. The assignment dates, though, including the
quizzes, were on the sheet, so anyone
who could do
satisfactory work without attending the
lectures, maybe by reading the textbook and the
other materials, that was all right with me. And
you were a pioneer female faculty member. Did
women students turn to you occasionally for any
advice? Actually, the
students who came to me for advice and counsel back
then were mostly men, young men. I think
they saw me as Mama. As far as the young women were
concerned, I don't know where they went, but they
didn't come to me. And what was the normal title
that the students gave you when they spoke to you?
They tended to call me Mrs. McCann. Of course, I did
not have a Ph.D. I did not have a Ph.D. then, so I
would not have been Dr. McCann. But they tended to
call me Mrs. McCann. And they were polite. And they
were polite. Mrs. McCann, ma'am. Let's back up a
little and describe how it was to get settled into
this community. You all found a place to live and
children and so forth. Yes. Now,
Hugh came out a couple of weeks after he was hired.
He came out and stayed with Manuel Davenport for
three or four days and bought a house. And the house
cost $19,000. It was on Carter Creek Parkway. And
it was a nice little brick house. It had three
bedrooms in a very pleasant area.
So we didn't have any trouble with that. And the
children were not yet school age? No, they were
not. And we took them to French's Royal Tot, which
actually worked out very well for my daughter. I
think it was not the right place for my son. But I
didn't know that then. It seemed fine. Do you
remember what that daycare cost then? Yeah. It
cost $65 a month for one. And I think $95. That's
quite good. Yeah. I reduced right over to it. And
your neighbors, how were they? How were they in
being receptive to a newcomer? Well, I didn't like
the neighbors, frankly. I thought them bigots.
For one thing, we had a maid, as everybody did then.
And they were very upset because I let the maid
bring her little girl to play with my little girl.
And this caused all kinds of problems. So I didn't
get on very well with the neighbors. I did also,
before I worked in the fall, I did go to some of their
little cafe clutches. And I hated them. That is,
not the neighbors, but those morning coffees
where people would discuss their families and
their lives. And to me, it seemed extremely
limited and sterile. And this led to my being very
anxious to get out of there and talk to Emanuel
Davenport about the possibility of escape. But,
no, the neighbors were not neighbors I would have
chosen. They were not affiliated with the
university. They worked in a factory. And now I
can't think where or which. Was it a shoe factory?
It could have been a shoe factory. Ms. Carson? I
don't remember, but I do remember that neighbors
on both sides worked in a factory and were friends.
And the neighbor behind us, I liked him somewhat
better. He was military.
Across the street from us was Dr. Caperton, the
skin person. And they held themselves aloof, the
Capertons. They had a bigger house and they kind of
didn't socialize too much with the rest of us. In
fact, there was a whole little enclave of bigger
houses across the street. But
once I got out of the neighborhood, it was pleasant
enough. I mean, it was certainly a nice place to
live. They were... The neighbors were decent
people. They were just very narrow-minded. What
about shopping? There was nothing much. There was
the Townshire Shopping Center and that was it.
There was, I believe, a Sears there. There was a
pharmacy with a
little diner in it where they used to have in
pharmacies. And I used to... We only had one car.
So, actually, the semester I spent home alone, was
not fun. Because I didn't have the car either and I
had the little girl. But what I would do would be to
wheel her to the Townshire Shopping Center. And
there we would have, like, ice cream sundaes at the
little diner inside it. And go to Sears, maybe. But
there was not much. There was a Kroger's. That was.
Now we're... Hastings. Hastings, you know,
Manner East. And there was the Townshire Shopping
Center. And there was Downtown College Station.
And one thing... I mean, Downtown Bryan. I'm
sorry. There was nothing Downtown College
Station except for a couple of shoe places and
barber shops. And all the student bars. One thing I
noticed, though, was that back then when you came
into town, all the local merchants gave you these
credit cards. They called you up. And they gave you
credit cards that were good for their own stores.
Beverly Braley. I understand something terrible
happened to him. He just retired. And then he was
killed in an accident. It probably wasn't an
accident. Yeah. Don't put that in the... I forgot
about that machine. Let's see. Did you become
involved in any community activities? Not right
away. After I started working, I did. Because I
must say that I had a lot more leisure as an
instructor and then later as a lecturer even than I
have now. Now, any spare time is immediately
filled in. Back then, I just taught my classes and
went home. So I was a Girl Scout leader. I worked at
the Bryan City Mission. I worked for the Brazos
Valley Literacy Council. I did all these things.
Church? Synagogue? Did you attend? Oh, yeah.
Catholic. We went to church. Which... Describe
the parish y'all attended. Back then, we
attended... Let's see. We attended St. Mary's.
And it was not that different from the way it is now.
I mean, it was full of Aggies.
Yeah,
that was it. St. Mary's was our parish for years and
years. And then they built St. Thomas. We sort of
moved over there, but what frequently happens is
that my husband goes to St. Thomas Aquinas and I
still go to St. Mary's because, A, I don't like to
get up to go to the 830 Mass, and, B, I like going to
St. Mary's. This man, Manuel Davenport, since I
won't be able to interview him, tell me as much as
you can. How did you all come to know him in the first
place? Okay. And then describe him as much as you
can because we need to be sure to include him in this
reservoir. Yeah. He, first of all, invited Hugh to
stay with him and look for a house and then helped
Hugh find a house. But how did they even... He hired
Hugh. Oh. There was a search and he hired Hugh. Oh,
in philosophy? Yeah. Oh, I'm sorry. Yeah. No, no
problem. But there was a search in philosophy and
they hired Hugh. And then they invited him to come
out and stay with them and find accommodations. So
he did that. And I was, at this time, pregnant. And I
told him that I wanted a house. I said I wanted to
start with a house. So, although we didn't have
very much money, with my parents' help, it was
possible to buy this house. And back then, too, it
was much easier to get a bank loan. There wasn't
much of a check. You know, you were an A&M
professor. You could have the loan. So we got this
house on Carter Creek Parkway. But the Davenports
were very nice to Hugh. And I can't imagine that
happening now, that you hire somebody and the head
invites this person to stay with them for three or
four days and helps them find a house. So then we
came out. And I liked the philosophy department
immediately. It was about how many? I would say
about six. There was Ed Harris and Davenport and
Stadelman and Becca. Who am I missing?
I don't think there was anybody else besides Hugh.
Those are the people I remember from parties. That
is, as permanent members.